# ‘Material markets’ in Asian history, 1000-1940

[materials for an alternative course on financial history, jottings, etc.]

## Introduction

More often than not, finance and financial markets conjure up images of abstract models, impenetrable jargon, and tortuous equations. This project, without denying the latter, argues that there also exist succinctly material aspects to them. In a concrete example: although markets trade sets of broadly similar or even identical securities, distinctly different rules and mechanisms governing their trading procedures and, in particular, technicalities governing the flows of information among market participants ―what we nowadays conveniently refer to as microstructure― produce distinct ways of price formation and price discovery and, consequently, result in very different market outcomes, with clear implications for how markets evolve. Taking clues from the sociology of finance (MacKenzie, 2008; 2009) and especially from a strand of research in financial history (Goetzmann, 2005; 2017; Poitras, 2006), my current project focuses on East-Asian financial history in a comparative context.

## State of the Art

Traditionally, one of the most promising venues for highlighting the materiality of markets has been the study of communication technologies enabling the transactions that take place within them. In a most recent example, John Handel has documented how the introduction of the ticker tape in the nineteenth-century London Stock Exchange went hand in hand with the creation of new inequalities in the distribution of price information among financiers and investors (2021), a finding that contradicts the efficiency and democratization story that the ticker’s inventors and traditional economic studies have embraced. Similar asymmetries caused by the implementation of communication technologies have been discovered and documented by Eichengreen (2016) and MacKenzie (2009), from whom this project has borrowed its title. Unfortunately, very few studies have attempted to dig up parallels in non-Western contexts. In the Japanese context, Takatsuki has described how pre-modern messenger services as hikyakuya 飛脚屋 and tebata 手旗 cemented the role of capital-rich speculators in the Osaka Dojima Rice Securities Exchange (2018).
Different, and, in my view, equally compelling, approaches to the materiality of markets have concentrated on the architectural design of (financial) marketplaces (Neal 1993; MacKenzie 2009); the role of mathematical developments (including material limits to computability) and actuarial science (Haberman, 1995), computing tools and data visualization (Poitras 2006) in the creation of financial instruments; bookkeeping tools and manuals (Schiltz 2020); assaying practices, trading heuristics (Haug & Taleb, 2011; Bouchaud et al., 2018), and so on (it is difficult if not impossible to make this list exhaustive). The approaches are not only aligned by their interest in the perceived inefficiencies and/or asymmetries market microstructure is believed to have produced. Interestingly, they are part and parcel of a very recent strand in the literature highlighting microstructure as the key to understanding the inner workings of the financial ecosystem (Bouchaud, 2008; Bouchaud et al., 2018).

## Project Methodology

As in my earlier projects, the mainstay of the work is almost equally divided between a substantial data gathering (and ‘open data’ publishing) effort on the one hand, and an attempt at interpreting/documenting, on the other. With respect to the latter, the project deliberately pursues what some economic historians have dubbed an ethno-historiographical approach (Flandreau / Zumer, 2004: 13-14); it seeks to elucidate quantitative data by coupling them with bank-internal (official and semi-official) reports and comments, newspaper interpretations at the time, accounting manuals and so on. Earlier research on the history of hedging strategies in international trade (Schiltz, 2020) bred a very thorough acquaintance with this methodology; it also facilitates gauging the feasibility of the current project.

## Project Roadmap

Material Markets does not attempt to give an answer to one circumscribed research question but exists of several interrelated yet distinct research questions or research avenues, some of which may be developed in cooperation with researchers from different international institutions.

1. Building on earlier research (Schiltz, 2020), I seek to further elucidate the conspicuously neglected role of financial contracts, hedging, and arbitrage technologies (Poitras 2010) in the development of international and intra-Asian commerce after 1800. The project seeks to ‘re-engineer’ those technologies both quantitatively and qualitatively. For this aspect of the project, archival research is paramount; several of the archives to be used have already been identified and photographed (Mercantile Bank of India, London and China (archives held at the HSBC) and the Chartered Bank of India, Australia and China (archives held at the London Metropolitan Archives)). Curiously, research into the development of financial technologies per se is almost nonexistent, perhaps due to the difficulty of locating reliable sources, knowledge of different languages pertaining to international trade, or else. The project under discussion is guaranteed to provide novel insights into the origin and growth of the finance of world trade in the first period of globalization. Holdings within the Jardine Matheson Archive (in the Cambridge University Library) carry particular importance for the project under discussion. Apart from two seminal publications in Japanese (Ishii, 1984; Ishii, 1998), an analysis of the accounts of this merchant house or the exploration of the trade and insurance contracts underlying its business is still waiting to be done. With dr. Kobayashi Atsushi (until recently a visiting researcher at Cambridge University), I am assessing the potential and challenges of this project.
2. A non-negligible part of the project concerns a curation effort. Following up on several preservation projects in which I happened to be involved, I hope to acquire a range of ‘material financial objects’ (banking paraphernalia, scripophily, trade contracts and certificates…) to be showcased online; this aspect profits from an earlier collaboration with the Resources and Historical Collections Office (資料室 *shiryō-shitsu*) of the library of the Faculty of Economics (University of Tokyo), and was doubled up with real-world expertise in digital preservation (e.g. with companies as Arkivum (UK) and Nichimy (Japan), in the context of a preservation project at the Graduate Institute, Geneva)...
3. The methodological elements (and potential hurdles) of the project under discussion are already being explored in a spin-off project with Prof. Takatsuki Yasuo (Kobe University). We are currently preparing several articles on (a) the nature of the monetary standard(s) of pre-modern Japan, (b) the role of arbitrage in the ‘Yokohama gold rush’ (1859) and the impact on the economy of West Japan, and (c) the role of heuristics in futures trading in the Osaka Dojima Rice Securities Exchange during the 17 and 18th centuries.

## List of references

* Bouchaud, Jean-Philippe. 2008. “Economics Needs a Scientific Revolution.” Nature 455 (7217): 1181–1181. <https://doi.org/10.1038/4551181a>.
* Bouchaud, Jean-Philippe, Julius Bonart, Jonathan Donier, and Martin Gould. 2018. *Trades, Quotes and Prices: Financial Markets Under the Microscope*. Cambridge University Press.
* Eichengreen, Barry, Romain Lafarguette, and Arnaud Mehl. 2016. “Cables, Sharks and Servers: Technology and the Geography of the Foreign Exchange Market.” 21884. <https://doi.org/10.3386/w21884>.
* Flandreau, Marc, and Frederic Zumer. 2004. *The Making of Global Finance 1880-1913*. Organization for Economic Cooperation & Devel.
* Goetzmann, William N., and K. Geert Rouwenhorst, eds. 2005. *The Origins of Value: The Financial Innovations That Created Modern Capital Markets*. Oxford ; New York: Oxford University Press.
* Goetzmann, William N. 2017. *Money Changes Everything: How Finance Made Civilization Possible*. Revised edition. Princeton, New Jersey Oxford: Princeton Univ Pr.
* Haberman, Steven. 1995. *The History of Actuarial Science*. London: Routledge.
* Handel, John. 2021. “The Material Politics of Finance: The Ticker Tape and the London Stock Exchange, 1860s–1890s.” Enterprise & Society, 1–31. <https://doi.org/10.1017/eso.2021.3>.
* Haug, Espen Gaarder, and Nassim Nicholas Taleb. 2011. “Option Traders Use (Very) Sophisticated Heuristics, Never the Black–Scholes–Merton Formula.” *Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization* 77 (2): 97–106. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jebo.2010.09.013>.
* Ishii Kanji 石井寛治. 1984. 『近代日本とイギリス資本―ジャーディン=マセソン商会を中心に』. Tōkyō: 東京大学出版会.
* Ishii Mayako 石井摩耶子. 1998. 『近代中国とイギリス資本―19世紀後半のジャーディン・マセソン商会を中心に』. 東京: 東京大学出版会.
* MacKenzie, Donald. 2008. *An Engine, Not a Camera: How Financial Models Shape Markets*. The MIT Press.
* MacKenzie, Donald. 2009. *Material Markets: How Economic Agents Are Constructed*. Oxford University Press, USA.
* Neal, Larry. 1993. *The Rise of Financial Capitalism: International Capital Markets in the Age of Reason*. Cambridge University Press.
* Poitras, Geoffrey, ed. 2006. *Pioneers of Financial Economics*. Cheltenham, UK ; Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
* Poitras, Geoffrey. 2010. “Arbitrage: Historical Perspectives.” In *Encyclopedia of Quantitative Finance*. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. <https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470061602.eqf01010>.
* Schiltz, Michael. 2020. *Accounting for the Fall of Silver: Hedging Currency Risk in Long-Distance Trade with Asia, 1870-1913*. New York: Oxford University Press.
* Takatsuki Yasuo 高槻泰郎. 2018. 『大坂堂島米市場 江戸幕府vs市場経済』. 東京: 講談社.
